http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_styles
synthesis analysis
methodical study
fact retention
elaborative processing


Learning styles - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
The David A. Kolb styles model is based on the Experiential Learning Theory, as explained in his book Experiential Learning: Experience as the source of learning and development .

Kolb's model gave rise to the Learning Style Inventory, an assessment method used to determine an individual's learning style.

An individual may exhibit a preference for one of the four styles—Accommodating, Converging, Diverging and Assimilating—depending on their approach to learning via the experiential learning theory model. Although Kolb's model is the most widely accepted with substantial empirical support, recent studies suggest the Learning Style Inventory is seriously flawed

The Honey & Mumford Learning Styles Questionnaire is a self-development tool and differs from Kolb's Learning Style inventory by inviting managers to complete a checklist of work-related behaviours without directly asking managers how they learn.

A MORI survey commissioned by The Campaign for Learning in 1999 found the Honey & Mumford LSQ to be the most widely used system for assessing preferred learning styles in the local government sector in the UK.

Individuals with different combinations learn in different ways—they have different strengths, different things make sense to them, different things are difficult for them, and they ask different questions throughout the learning process.

Some critics of today's schools, of the concept of learning disabilities , of special education , and of response to intervention , take the position that every child has a different learning style and pace and that each child is unique , not only capable of learning but also capable of succeeding.

None of their graduates are real or functional illiterates, and no one who meets their older students could ever guess the age at which they first learned to read or write. In a similar manner, students learn all the subjects, techniques, and skills in these schools.

Describing current instructional methods as homogenization and lockstep standardization, alternative approaches are proposed, such as the Sudbury Model of Democratic Education schools, an alternative approach in which children, by enjoying personal freedom thus encouraged to exercise personal responsibility for their actions , learn at their own pace and style rather than following a compulsory and chronologically-based curriculum.

Proponents of unschooling have also claimed that children raised in this method learn at their own pace and style, and do not suffer from learning disabilities.

One of the most common and widely-used categorizations of the various types of learning styles is Fleming's VARK model which expanded upon earlier Neuro-linguistic programming models: kinesthetic learners or tactile learners .