Theory of multiple intelligences - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
The theory of multiple intelligences was proposed by Howard Gardner in his 1983 book Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences as a model of intelligence that differentiates it into specific "modalities", rather than seeing it as dominated by a single general ability.

Intelligence tests and psychometrics have generally found high correlations between different aspects of intelligence, rather than the low correlations which Gardner's theory predicts, supporting the prevailing theory of general intelligence rather than multiple intelligences .

Gardner believes that careers that suit those with this intelligence include: athletes , pilots , dancers , musicians , actors , surgeons , builders , police officers , and soldiers . Although these careers can be duplicated through virtual simulation, they will not produce the actual physical learning that is needed in this intelligence.

According to Gardner in How Are Kids Smart: Multiple Intelligences in the Classroom, "Inter- and Intra- personal intelligence is often misunderstood with being extroverted or liking other people..." Those with this intelligence communicate effectively and empathize easily with others, and may be either leaders or followers.

Some proponents of multiple intelligence theory proposed spiritual or religious intelligence as a possible additional type.

Gardner did not want to commit to a spiritual intelligence, but suggested that an "existential" intelligence may be a useful construct.

One major criticism of the theory is that it is ad hoc : that Gardner is not expanding the definition of the word "intelligence", but rather denies the existence of intelligence as traditionally understood, and instead uses the word "intelligence" where other people have traditionally used words like "ability" and " aptitude ". This practice has been criticized by Robert J. Sternberg , Eysenck , and Scarr.

They would state that the traditional interpretation of intelligence collapses under the weight of its own logic and definition, noting that intelligence is usually defined as the cognitive or mental capacity of an individual, which by logical necessity would include all forms of mental qualities, not just the ones most transparent to I.Q. tests.

He then added a disclaimer that he has no fixed definition, and his classification is more of an artistic judgment than fact: Ultimately, it would certainly be desirable to have an algorithm for the selection of an intelligence, such that any trained researcher could determine whether a candidate's intelligence met the appropriate criteria.

Gardner argues that by calling linguistic and logical-mathematical abilities intelligences, but not artistic, musical, athletic, etc. abilities, the former are needlessly aggrandized.

Gardner's addition of the naturalistic intelligence and conceptions of the existential and moral intelligences are seen as fruits of this diffusion.

In Demetriou's theory, one of the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development , Gardner is criticized for underestimating the effects exerted on the various domains of intelligences by processes that define general processing efficiency, such as speed of processing , executive functions , working memory , and meta-cognitive processes underlying self-awareness and self-regulation .

All of these processes are integral components of general intelligence that regulate the functioning and development of different domains of intelligence.

According to a 2006 study many of Gardner's "intelligences" correlate with the g factor , supporting the idea of a single dominant type of intelligence.

Linda Gottfredson has argued that thousands of studies support the importance of intelligence quotient in predicting school and job performance, and numerous other life outcomes. In contrast, empirical support for non-g intelligences is lacking or very poor.

A critical review of MI theory argues that there is little empirical evidence to support it: To date there have been no published studies that offer evidence of the validity of the multiple intelligences.

In 2004 Sternberg and Grigerenko stated that there were no validating studies for multiple intelligences, and in 2004 Gardner asserted that he would be "delighted were such evidence to accrue", and admitted that "MI theory has few enthusiasts among psychometricians or others of a traditional psychological background" because they require "psychometric or experimental evidence that allows one to prove the existence of the several intelligences."

The same review presents evidence to demonstrate that cognitive neuroscience research does not support the theory of multiple intelligences: ... the human brain is unlikely to function via Gardner’s multiple intelligences.

Taken together the evidence for the intercorrelations of subskills of IQ measures, the evidence for a shared set of genes associated with mathematics, reading, and g, and the evidence for shared and overlapping "what is it?" and "where is it?" neural processing pathways, and shared neural pathways for language, music, motor skills, and emotions suggest that it is unlikely that each of Gardner’s intelligences could operate "via a different set of neural mechanisms" .

Because Gardner claimed that the intelligences are innate potentialities related to a general content area, MI theory lacks a rationale for the phylogenetic emergence of the intelligences.

Gardner believes that the purpose of schooling "should be to develop intelligences and to help people reach vocational and avocational goals that are appropriate to their particular spectrum of intelligences. People who are helped to do so, [he] believe[s], feel more engaged and competent and therefore more inclined to serve society in a constructive way." [a]

Gardner's theory argues that students will be better served by a broader vision of education, wherein teachers use different methodologies, exercises and activities to reach all students, not just those who excel at linguistic and logical intelligence.

Gardner states that "while Multiple Intelligences theory is consistent with much empirical evidence, it has not been subjected to strong experimental tests ... Within the area of education, the applications of the theory are currently being examined in many projects. Our hunches will have to be revised many times in light of actual classroom experience."

Jerome Bruner called Gardner’s "intelligences" "at best useful fictions," and Charles Murray and Richard J. Herrnstein in The Bell Curve called Gardner's theory "uniquely devoid of psychometric or other quantitative evidence."

Thomas Armstrong argues that Waldorf education engages all of Gardner's original seven intelligences. [b] In spite of its lack of general acceptance in the psychological community, Gardner's theory has been adopted by many schools, where it is often used to underpin discussion about learning styles , and hundreds of books have been written about its applications in education.